- Динамо задумывалась как полностью симметричная система
На практике даже распределённые алгоритмы дают более высокую 
производительность если, в отсутствие аварий, таких как 
network partitioning или node failure, есть distinguished leader,
который принимает решение в группе.

http://damienkatz.net/2013/05/dynamo_sure_works_hard.html

If Dynamo used a traditional quorum approach it would be
unavailable during server failures and network partitions, and
would have reduced durability even under the simplest of failure
conditions.


Business logic specific reconciliation: This is a popular use
case for Dynamo. Each data object is replicated across
multiple nodes. In case of divergent versions, the client
application performs its own reconciliation logic. The
shopping cart service discussed earlier is a prime example of
this category. Its business logic reconciles objects by
merging different versions of a customer’s shopping cart.

Timestamp based reconciliation: This case differs from the
previous one only in the reconciliation mechanism. In case of
divergent versions, Dynamo performs simple timestamp
based reconciliation logic of “last write wins”; i.e., the object
with the largest physical timestamp value is chosen as the
correct version. The service that maintains customer’s
session information is a good example of a service that uses
this mode.

•
High performance read engine: While Dynamo is built to be
an “always writeable” data store, a few services are tuning its
quorum characteristics and using it as a high performance
read engine. Typically, these services have a high read
request rate and only a small number of updates. In this
configuration, typically R is set to be 1 and W to be N. For
these services, Dynamo provides the ability to partition and
replicate their data across multiple nodes thereby offering
incremental scalability. Some of these instances function as
the authoritative persistence cache for data stored in more
heavy weight backing stores. Services that maintain product
catalog and promotional items fit in this category.
